Okay, Ashok da, he is one of our past chairmen and trustee. How did you get involved in festival, Ashok da, and when it was?
I've been in this country for the past 35 years and I got involved directly with the Welsh Puja Committee and Durga Puja in 1984-85.
Puja in those days was held at the parade on a lot smaller scale than it is held now.
My association with the Puja was because of friends who were involved in the Puja and I became part of the group and put my efforts into helping with the functions and the Puja.
Who were the people at that time when you started attending the Puja? Can you remember that?
Yes, I can recall a lot of people actually. The senior members, we used to have a Purohit, Mr Banerjee, I remember him quite vividly.
And we had the older members like Rupen Majumdar and his wife. We had Deepak and his wife. We had Ashit Haldar and his family.
And then the younger lot came in afterwards and then unfortunately around that time I left the country. I went away for five years and I lost complete touch till I came back again in 1994.
Do you remember where did you go to see the first Puja? What was the venue? Can you remember the venue?
Yes, I think my first venue I recall is at the parade which was in the early 80s. And then I also remember having moved from the parade to the swimming pool.
There was an Empire swimming pool which is not non-existent now. It was built in the late 70s for the Olympics.
And we had several years of Pujas done there which was a mammoth task as the Pratima had to be lifted on the lift all the way to the third floor. And it was seriously physically very challenging.
And when you attended the Puja in parade which I think is before Empire swimming pool, what type of image was it then? Can you remember the image?
We had an image. I know before that I am told that we had hanging on a piece of cloth. But we did have an image. And if I remember correctly, they were all on one piece of artwork which included Durga and her daughters and son on one piece of single unit.
I think that image may have been made by Mr. Kamal Ghatak.
No, I think Kamal Ghatak made previous images. I am not aware of the ones that he made.
Can you remember a specific event or event or events which sticks out in your mind about Durga Puja throughout the time you have been attending Durga Puja? I know there may be more than one.
That's right. The experiences are very varied depending upon which time of the period. And my experience lasts for about 20 years in reality because I was away for five.
So the early experiences are different from those of the new ones. And among the early experiences that I mentioned earlier that when we were at the parade, it was a smaller group.
And simultaneously we also had a function that was done by another community, a Hindu community. And there was a big mix-up with people coming and going and it appeared to be a huge function.
And it was very chaotic at the end of the night when the food was served. And then I think it continued reasonably well till the day of Visharja and then we had to remove everything and take them away using the lift.
Oh, Khandesh Chiran. Sorry. I am confusing with the two now. And what do you think was your contribution in Durga Puja? Not in the beginning I am talking about, but even now and over the years.
In the beginning I was never a pure spectator. I mean, whenever, even for the first time when we went, we did participate in little events that was possible to participate in because there were a lot of older members who were involved in this.
And so we had to make our place in that society. And we eventually did. The children were involved with functions and cultural programs which included naturally the parents. And therefore I think I was involved to a large extent throughout my experience here with the pujas.
And your children were involved as well at some stage? Yes, my children along with similar age group children in our community were involved in cultural programs, dances and they were truly part of the puja function in every way you can think of.
Oh, that's great. Thank you. And what do you think, if I can ask this, that what do you think is holding the group together now? The Welsh Puja Committee and the Noviya Festival.
That is extremely interesting and I have to mention here that actually our group has shrunk a little to start with because the Welsh Puja Committee which was a single entity has now split into three groups.
The current Welsh Puja Committee is now a very solid group of friends who are committed to the cause of Welsh Puja Committee and are constantly increasing in their numbers.
And in the last few years we have had a footfall of over a thousand people over the five days of the pujas. And these people are consistently with us and are part of the community and are of help both financially and participating in the needs of the committee and the pujas.
And would you like to talk about anything else, what you have said, anything else you feel about the festival and the image making?
I think that the entire Puja Committee is a thing that has grown over the years and I have seen this immense change and growth in not just celebrating the five days of Durga Puja but in general with the community, our various diverse programs that we have over the years.
And I think we are part of the community in a large way and quite conspicuous by our involvement and we are virtually known to the local Welsh people as people who are participating in functions which we try and include them in as well.
And we are well and truly a part of this Indian Welsh community and extremely well accepted. And I see no reason why this will not grow from year to year and maybe someday we will get local involvement as well.
That's great. Thank you very much Ashok. Thank you.
Thank you.